Variation Concept Origination Policies
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

The most recent human reference genome--Human reference build 38 from the Genome Reference Consortium (GRCh38)--is actively and increasingly in use by groups around the world. This reflects continued progress from several major revisions and patch releases since the original human genome reference sequence was first completed in 2003. However, despite the increasing use of GRCh38 today by genomic data providers, variation annotations derived from previous human genome assemblies are still in heavy use by genomic data providers. Additional population-specific reference genomes are also in use, such as the JG1 Japanese reference genome. Future contiguous and/or graph human genome assemblies are certain to emerge and further fragment reference sequence usage by genomic data providers. A similar diversity of reference sequence builds are also present in non-human genome systems of relevance to human genomics health research.

This diversity of reference genome sequence builds is compounded by the many collections and releases of transcript and protein sequences corresponding to genes encoded in the genome assembly. This also adds complexity in representing a variation by expanding the space of *variation contexts*. Among these are *projection contexts* such as a genomic variation, a projection of that variation onto an aligned transcript model, and a projected protein change (as applicable) resulting from a transcript variation. Another common class of contexts are *liftover contexts* representing an aligned change on different genome assemblies.

Additional complexity is introduced by genomic data providers representing multiple variation contexts together as a group under a unifying identifier. Examples of identifiers for variation groups include ClinVar Variation IDs, ClinGen Allele Registry Canonical Allele IDs, or CIViC Variant IDs. These IDs are sometimes used as the direct subject of annotations created by other resources. For example, the ClinGen Variant Curation Interface uses Allele Registry IDs or ClinVar Variation IDs as the variation concept (instead of a description of the genomic change) when curating the role of genomic variation in clinical significance classifications.

As a result of this multi-faceted landscape of variation contexts and variation groups, harmonizing genomic variation data from multiple resources is a significant challenge. This draft specification provides a framework for specifying and publishing a *variation concept origination policy (VCOP)*. A VCOP enables genomic data providers to tightly constrain the reference sequences and selection rules used to reproducibly construct an *originating variation context*: a specific variation context that serves as the unique normalized representation of any input variation or variation group.

.. note:: If you are interested in helping to draft the specification for
          creating and publishing *VCOPs*, join us on the `VRSATILE GitHub
          repo <https://github.com/ga4gh/vrsatile/issues/1>`_ to engage in this
          effort.
